© THE business breakfast forum being hosted by the Daily News in conjunction with the ministry of Mines and Mining Development has attracted an impressive list of speakers and panellists. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Over 150 people are expected to attend the forum at the Meikles Hotel in Harare tomorrow where Mines and Mining Development minister Winston Chitando will be the keynote speaker.
The forum is running under the theme: “Towards a US$12 billion sector: Mining industry perspectives”. Other notable speakers include Finance and Economic Development minister Mthuli Ncube and Chamber of Mines of Zimbabwe president Elizabeth Nerwande. Panellists drawn from the various mining companies will contribute as well as interrogate issues pertinent to the achievement of a US$12 billion mining sector by the year 2023. Panellists include John Musekiwa, chief executive officer of Zimasco; Bhekinkosi Nkomo, the top dog at RioZim; Thomas Gono, the chairperson of the Gold Producers Association; Raymond Mutokonyi, the director at Makomo Resources, and Colin Chibafa, the chief finance officer at Unki Mine. Munyaradzi Hwengwere will facilitate the discussions while prominent radio and television personality Barry Manandi will be the director of ceremonies. Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe (ANZ) general manager sales and marketing Francis Mushaninga said Energy and Power Development minister Fortune Chasi and Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe governor John Mangudya would also be available to enrich the discussions. He said the forum presents an opportunity for miners and other stakeholders in the sector to engage with Chitando, Ncube, Chasi and Mangudya and their teams on issues that impact on the achievement of the US$12 billion roadmap by 2023. “There is no doubt that mining has a significant role to play in the revival of our economy. As such, the minister and his team are doing everything practically possible to rally all stakeholders to support the vision,” said Mushaninga. “We are therefore expecting stakeholders in the mining sector — from the directors, the executives and all those involved in the value chain, including suppliers — to attend in their numbers so that there is sameness in thinking and direction towards the attainment of the US$12 billion mining sector.” Zimbabwe’s mining sector generates about 70 percent of the country’s foreign currency earnings. During the first half of the year, the sector contributed US$1,3 billion to GDP or 68 percent of total exports, with a formal employment complement of 45 000 people. However, the industry is faced with a myriad challenges ranging from high costs of production; fuel and electricity shortages; foreign exchange controls; exchange rate disparities to high taxes; uncertainties in the labour markets; ageing plant and equipment and the high cost of capital. Their most pressing challenge has been the intermittent power cuts and since mines operate 24/7, power must be available at all times. To mitigate the impact, mines have been turning to generators, which are expensive to run considering the high cost and availability of liquid fuels.  