© POLITICAL parties’ election financing is a problem not only in Zimbabwe, but in most underdeveloped countries. Only ruling parties use the power of incumbency to use government facilities and infrastructure to oil their campaign, obviously to the detriment of the opposition. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); The playing field is never level and tends to favour ruling parties that have access to State coffers, often through corruption. It is against this background that election observer groups during Zimbabwe’s July 2018 elections recommended that the country needed a political campaign finance regulatory framework. Among the observer groups were the Zimbabwe Election Support Network (Zesn), which have since called for political financing reforms in the country to level the playing field. They are spot on! Zesn is soundly proposing that there should be transparency in the existing system of public funding for political parties. This would require a reporting mechanism to be set up where political parties report their expenditures on a periodic basis. There is also need for an oversight body, such as the Justice ministry, to be assigned responsibility for monitoring political party compliance with the reporting requirements and enforcing any sanctions for non-compliance. Political parties would need to be capacitated for reporting, and a mechanism would be needed to disclose reports to the public. Such a step could help to enhance public confidence in political par- ties. The political parties finance framework must provide a basis for controlling the growing influ- ence of money in politics, as well as curbing the potential for corruption in the political system. The framework should uphold the existing provisions that prohibit foreign funding of political parties as well as the spending limit for political parties currently set at US$500 000. For this monitoring to be effective, periodic reporting of expenditures by candidates and parties during the election period would need to be introduced, with oversight responsibilities assigned to the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission. Further, provisions to limit campaign finance could also be considered, including limits on the individual contributions that can be made to candi- dates and parties. A system of public disclosure of political con- tributions (while addressing any privacy concerns) would shine a light on where the money in politics comes from and could enhance public confidence in the political system, especially if authorities are seen to enforce requirements for reporting and disclosure. Zimbabwe is not currently meeting its international and regional commitments in the area of political finance.  