© BOTSWANA’S main opposition Umbrella for Democratic Change (UDC) leader Duma Boko has confirmed that he will challenge the outcome of the recently held 2019 general elections, which saw President Mokgweetsi Masisi being declared the winner. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Despite that, Botswana remains one of the few countries in southern Africa that has made considerable investment in facilitating the enjoyment of the right to vote by persons with visual impairments to ensure inclusivity in elections. Article 29 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) underscores the equal right of persons with disabilities to participate in political life and calls on States to: “ensure that persons with disabilities can effectively participate in political and public life on an equal basis with others, directly or through freely chosen representatives, including the right and opportunity for persons with disabilities to vote and be elected.” Zimbabwe can draw lessons from Botswana which conducted elections on October 23, 2019, and made provisions for PWDs to fully participate in the polls, including the visually impaired.
The Zimbabwe Election Support Network (Zesn) deployed a learning mission and got a chance to witness the use of tactile Braille Template for the visually impaired. Tactile Braille Template is more effective than Braille ballot paper in ensuring secrecy of the vote as it leaves no trace of who would have cast their ballot. In the same vein that the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (Zec) accords those that are visually impaired and illiterate an opportunity to be assisted to vote by a helper or aid of their choice, there are provisions for assisted voting in Botswana. The Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) of Botswana goes a step further and makes it mandatory that a helper of choice should be a registered voter at that particular polling station. The presiding officer stands next to the voter and the voter’s preferred helper, in the booth, to ensure that the voter’s helper correctly marks the ballot paper to indicate the voter’s choice. The presence of the presiding officer in the booth curtails the abuse of the assisted voter facility since he or she is an interested party as a voter and may mark the ballot on his or her own preferred candidate. Due to the high adult literacy rate in Botswana pegged at 87,7 percent, polling officers by law do not give any assistance to voters beyond directing him/her to a polling booth and informing the voter about poll procedures. This being the case, when a visually impaired registered voter walks into a polling station he or she is given an instructions voter’s manual written in Braille by the presiding officer which he or she reads on their own. The manual details the voting process. After going through the manual, the presiding officer then hands out the Tactile Braille Template for the visually impaired to cast their vote in secrecy.
If the voter needs assistance and cannot use Braille or write due to illiteracy, that is when an aid of choice comes to assist. In a recent paper by Zesn on PWDs, the prevalence of disability in Zimbabwe is seven percent, which puts the disability population around 900 000 and only 15 percent participate in Zimbabwe’s electoral processes. Some of the things that impede PWDs from participating in electoral processes in Zimbabwe include, chief among them, the non-availability of voter information in braille, electronic format or any other form for those with visual impairments, fear of violence, inaccessibility of the polling stations and voting infrastructure, lack of secrecy (especially for the visually impaired voters), lack of communication with polling officers (especially for the hearing impaired), voting materials not being in accessible formats. It is therefore imperative for Zec to consider instituting measures to ensure participation of PWDs in electoral processes, including coming up with a Voters’ Instructions Manual and avail ballot papers in Braille especially those with visual impairments ahead of the next polls. n Bundo is the Zesn Media and Information Officer  