STAFF Writer when you look at a person Sindiso Mhlophe from the rural area, this is a sat down with person who has been heavily Zimbabwe Human affected by the socio- Rights Association (Zim-economic challenges in our Rights) director Okay Machisa who has been traversing rural Zimbabwe assessing the deteriorating humanitarian and human rights situation in the country. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Below are excerpts of the interview. Q: Can you just give us an outlook of the humanitarian situation in rural areas that you have visited and assessed? A: I think all of us would agree with ZimRights that a person in the village is suf- fering more than those that are in the urban areas. The first thing that we have to understand is that we have witnessed directly affected the rural man, woman, girl and boy. What I’m talking about is poverty that is being ex- perienced on a daily basis by people in rural areas; not only caused by the drought but by the economic situation we are facing in Zimbabwe. So, you discover that in the rural areas, it is very easy for someone to starve and die of hunger if the State does not intervene. What we are also see- ing is that where a family used to have three meals, they are now surviving on one meal per day. This is because they don’t have the food; there is no maize and relish. If you go to Mt Darwin right now in areas like Mukumbura, Kadowata, Kajokoto and Kamutsen- zere, those areas have been hit hard as boreholes have dried up and we hope the recent nationwide rains have reached those areas as well. Q: Is the State helping rural communities with food? A: What we can actu- ally say is that country. If you look at the way they are having food aid that the government is spearheading in the rural areas, you will actually see that there are quite a number of cases that we have recorded that bring to the surface issues of corruption, nepotism and partisan distribution of that food aid. Of course, it’s not as huge as we used to see over the years, probably because of the way the government is hammering on corruption and ensuring that equality prevails in the communities. But we still have some individuals who don’t listen and we have recorded a number of cases where partisan distribution of food aid is taking place. Also, in the distribution of the presidential farming inputs we also have cases where people are complain- ing that only a few from Zanu PF are getting that stuff. But we would want the government to continue to insist that access to these inputs should be open to everybody, without looking at their political affiliation. Q: So, in other words are you calling for the government do more than what it is currently doing to assist people in rural areas? A: I have witnessed disaster in almost all the places I’ve been to. This is just November. Wait until we are in January and February. This is when authorities will realise that more needs to be done to assist people who are facing imminent hunger. So, it is important for the government to increase its calls to the international community to in- crease their humani- tarian aid like they ZimRights celebrated Africa Human Rights Day in Bulawayo recently. did in Manicaland when we were hit by Cyclone Idai.
I think this hunger has affected not only people in the rural areas but those in urban areas too. Q: And where is the politician in all this? A: Imagine you are a civil servant and you are getting $1 500 net. When you get into the shop you are rest assured that one small paper bag is not going to be filled by any meaning- ful goods. Poverty has really hit Zimbabweans to a point where our government and other political actors need to consider the life and the welfare of the citizens. Any opportunities that lie ahead of these politicians and our government has indicators that our people will survive, I would call upon the government and politicians to grab it. Otherwise you will wake up with your people dying because they don’t have the guts to speak like I am do- ing or the guts to demon- strate. It is important for the government and politicians to grab every opportunity in front of them to ensure that citizens have a decent life. Q: So, the people’s dignity has been taken away? A: At this moment we cannot talk about dignified living in our country. If you see a medical doctor, teacher, nurse and engineer begging, let us all remember that we are not doing justice to ourselves. I have been to govern- ment offices and I have seen small businesses taking place. You get into someone’s office you find this person selling shoes, blankets and clothes to supplement what they are failing to accom- plish within their family. You cannot blame these people because they are
not stealing. But I don’t think this is proper when somebody goes to work, they have to be paid in such a way that they can sustain their families with that money. But offices have been turned into tuckshops and small shopping malls. So, again, I will emphasise that the government and politi- cians should grab every op- portunity that lies ahead of them to ensure that citizens of Zimbabwe do not perish. Q: The doctors have been on strike for over two months, council nurses have also joined in while teachers are also in a tug of war with the government over salaries, where are we headed as a nation? A: It’s only doctors who have openly pronounced they are on strike, but I can tell you that the entire coun- try is on strike. The civil servants that you see going to work are just going to present them- selves physically but they are not working. So, we might fool our- selves saying that people are going to work but in terms of deliverables, there is nothing that is coming out. I can assure you that with the type of attitude we have with those people that are reporting to work, it’s a matter of ticking the boxes that today I have gone to work. Some offices are just run by jackets as people come in and go out to do other business. The whole nation is on strike. People are not working. At the moment, we are not a productive nation. If you look at the time people are investing at work and compare it with the salaries they are getting, then obvious one is demoti- vated. It’s important that the government notes that the people are perishing. Q: Do you believe there is an open space for the aggrieved workers to air their concerns? A: The democratic space in our country continues to shrink, and like I have indicated, the whole country is on strike but not the usual strike that we are used to. The government can stop people from demonstrating and taking to the streets, but people demonstrate the best way they can when they get to work, they simply don’t work and don’t deliver. So, if you will go and do a survey on what is being done at the work place, you will be surprised there is nothing. We want Zimbabwe to be a productive country be- cause there is a productive economy which gives back to the people. But if you have closed the avenues for people to protest, there are many other alternatives. These will be felt when you are scoring your GDP that actually nothing is being done in terms of production. If we can put aside selfishness, ego, and dif- ferences and work towards upbringing the welfare of Zimbabweans, I think we will go far in solving the problems we are facing. Q: Recently, you cel- ebrated the Africa Human Rights Day, how is the country’s human rights situation? A: The Africa Human Rights Day was celebrated under the theme ‘Fighting Corruption’ and I’m glad the government is making some efforts to fight the scourge. But that is one side. There is a need for the government to promote hu- man rights by making laws that allow citizens to enjoy fundamental freedoms. The State should also provide space where citizens can freely express themselves and associate. I think the major chal- lenge we have in our country is that of individu- als who abuse their power because they are part and parcel of the State. People in Zimbabwe are worried about the state of socio-economic and political rights. When we also look at the state of civil and political rights, there is a gap that we need to address to ensure the people can join their political parties freely with- out anybody harassing them and express their opinion without fear.  