© Organised by the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority Sanganai/Hlanganani — World Tourism Expo is an annual Tourism Trade Fair that showcases the widest variety of Africa’s best tourism products, and attracts international visitors and media from across the world. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); The Fair is the successor of Shanyai/Vakatshani, the Zimbabwe International Travel Expo (Zite) which was held annually at the Harare International Conference Centre. Zite started as a small expo 37 years ago in 1982 and grew over the years to become one of Africa’s leading tourism showcases by 2007. The past eight editions of Sanganai/Hlanganani were a resounding success and attracted the leading African destinations and major world tourism markets such as South Africa, Botswana, Malaysia, China, Zambia, Malawi, Kenya, Mozambique, Namibia, Indonesia, India, Italy and many others. The editions have seen the whole world converging in Zimbabwe in the form of high calibre international buyers as well as exhibitors. The 2019 edition will be held in the country’s second largest city, Bulawayo, and is expected to ride on the successes gained by the previous editions and is an opportunity not to be missed.
The Fair will target Embassies, International Airlines, Tourism destinations, leading Tour Wholesalers, Tour Operators and Travel Agents, Investors, Suppliers of goods and services among other exhibitors. Participants at Sanganai/Hlanganani — World Tourism Expo stand to learn and come across many opportunities such as, meeting and networking with exhibitors, visiting buyers, investors and suppliers of services to the tourism sector from all over the world. Furthermore, it’s a good environment to establish strategic business partnerships with world tourism players, showcase your destination, products and services, acquire knowledge about different source markets, derive value from well structured, themed and informative International tourism conferences and workshops, interact with travel media from all corners of the world, establish strategic partnerships with other destinations/Cities and network across Ministerial divides. The venue offers an extensive exhibition centre which encompasses a 17-hectare site situated close to the city’s central business district. Six specialised exhibition halls, hundreds of individual pavilions and open-air expo facilities are all fully serviced and equipped. Situated within the city of Bulawayo, the Zimbabwe International Exhibition Centre (ZIEC) has world-class facilities and is easily accessible from all areas of the city. ZIEC plays host to one of the internationally leading exhibitions such as the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF), Mine Entra and many others. The exhibition centre offers over 55 000 square meters indoor and outside exhibition space, adequate and secure parking for exhibitors and delegates. The Exhibition Centre layout is flexible enough to allow controlled or general access to any of the six exhibition halls and open-air sites.  