© Eddie Cross, the former secretary of economic affairs in the main MDC, looks like he is on a mission. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); A little bit of background would suffice!
Before the country regained independence in 1980, the father of two had served the minority regime of Ian Douglas Smith in many capacities. In his CV, Cross is silent about his involvement with the Selous Scouts — a special forces regiment of the Rhodesian Army that operated from 1973 until the reconstitution of the country as Zimbabwe in 1980 — although this is an indelible truth.
Upon leaving the Rhodesian army, he worked for several State entities, in succession. After independence, he continued with his work in the parastatal community courtesy of the policy of reconciliation adopted by the then majority government of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe. He became an outspoken critique of Mugabe’s government in late 199O’s. While it is not clear what led him to speak up against Mugabe, it is rumoured that he became bitter after his businesses were declared insolvent by the High Court in June 1997 after failing to repay ZW$5,7 million he owed mostly to banks. He initially faced a second count of failing to submit financial statements for August to December 2000 to his estate’s trustees but this was dropped because there was no evidence to convict him. When the MDC was formed in 1999, Cross became one of its founding members. Under MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai (now late), Cross’ profile grew in the opposition party. He was the party’s Bulawayo South lawmaker for two terms, after winning the seat in 2008 and 2013. He was also the MDC’s secretary of economic affairs and later became the party’s policy co-ordinator general. By virtue of his position, Cross used to sit in the MDC’s national executive. His association with the MDC came to a surprise end in November 2017 when he switched camps to the ruling party following a popular soft military coup that toppled Mugabe’s regime. Crucially, Tsvangirai’s health was failing at the time and none of the MDC officials that were in the running to succeed him, including Nelson Chamisa, had Cross in their future plans. By the time Tsvangirai passed on in February 2018, Cross had wormed his way through the corridors of power to become the de-facto spokesperson of President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s government on economic matters. It is, however, baffling that before the new administration’s second anniversary in November this year, Cross has already started criticising ...Mnangagwa for failing to lead the country out of an economic crisis, and yet this is largely a result of tough economic sanctions that he lobbied for while he was still in the MDC. Consistently though, Cross always showers praises on Finance minister Mthuli Ncube and his team at the Finance ministry while lambasting Mnangagwa for failing to run his government. This cheeky contradiction cannot be ignored. Is it not Ncube’s austerity measures that are behind the suffering by the Zimbabwean masses? How then does he become a saint? Cross’ other favourite punch-bag is none other than Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) governor John Mangudya whom he accuses of frustrating Ncube’s “progressive” policies. The irony is also too much to ignore: While he takes off gloves to chastise Mnangagwa and some of his officials, Cross claims to derive his mandate from a roundtable of economists that advise government on economic matters. Wittingly or unwittingly, Ncube has so far not made any effort to restrain Cross, who is the only cheerleader of his controversial policies that have found very few takers within and outside Zanu PF ever since his appointment to Cabinet in September 2018. The multi-million dollar question is: Could it be that Cross is doing the bidding for a certain group of people in government and what could be motivating this? It is highly unlikely, however, that Cross could dislike the CEO of government and still like some of his subordinates. The only plausible reason is that after failing to unseat the ruling party from the MDC platform, Cross could, for some reason, be out to cause divisions in government. Those who are close to him dispute this viewpoint. They argue that Cross has a string of transactions that he is trying to push through and needs friends in Mnangagwa’s administration to get the necessary approvals. Whatever the case may be, it is clear that he is a man on a mission. But whoever thinks they have Cross on a leash must be warned! Here is what Cross wrote on his personal website on December 1, 2013: “I opposed the policies of the former white minority government in Zimbabwe and when it became apparent that the new regime under Mr Mugabe was little better, I decided to join the opposition to try and get the country onto a sustainable path to prosperity and peace. “Zimbabwe is a rich country made poor by a succession of bad governments and poor policies. Nothing has illustrated this more than the collapse of the economy since 2000. The problems of Africa cannot be resolved from the outside and by choosing to stay in the country of my birth and to try and play a small part in getting the right policies in place that will deliver a better quality of life to all Zimbabweans, I hope we are able to make a small contribution to the well-being and future of all Africa”. For the record, there is nothing official about Cross’ opposition to white minority rule. What is there is his participation in the Rhodesian Army, which aided the minority government’s brutal repression of the majority blacks. What can also be deduced from his history is that Cross is an accomplished political flip-flopper who cannot be trusted. Many would recall how he almost earned a Cabinet role in February 2009 after he was designated by Tsvangirai for the position of minister of State Enterprises and Parastatals in the government of national unity. He was dropped from the Cabinet list and replaced prior to the Cabinet’s swearing-in after Mugabe resisted having an ex-Rhodie in his Cabinet. And when Mnangagwa constituted his Cabinet after the July 2018 polls, Cross was again tipped to make the line-up but couldn’t after Mnangagwa also resisted the push to have him in his Cabinet. It would therefore appear that Cross has never forgiven both Mugabe and Mnangagwa for snubbing him although he feigns to support some of their lieutenants in their administrations for purposes of furthering his own agenda. But with a cloud of mistrust hanging over his role in the new dispensation, until when will Mnangagwa allow him to mudsling his government and cause divisions from within? What we know is that a certain professor once tried to weaken the ruling party from within and almost succeeded until he was smoked out by the military in November 2017.
Only time will tell. l Anthony Matutu is a political scientist based in South Africa. He writes here in his personal capacity and can be contacted on anthony.matutu@yahoo.com [Adz'