© A FEW years ago, there were hardly any restaurants in Harare’s low-density suburbs serving traditional Zimbabwean dishes. Now it seems there are a great many of them, but all too many are poorly established and offer a sad and unappetising set of meals, usually over-priced. As a result, I have had a number of bad experiences, but with a couple of very good meals standing in stark contrast. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); One restaurant that has not only set a high standard, but has also achieved a high level of success is Gava’s in Belgravia, and it was here that I was able to experience a thoroughly enjoyable traditional meal during the Heroes weekend. It is a modestly-appointed venue in the grounds of Belgravia Sports Club, standing on what used to be the bowling green from the days when this was Postals Sports Club. Gava’s was created by Allen Gava back in 2013, and his aim then — and now — has been to run an establishment that gives pride of place to traditional Zimbabwean cuisine and allows it to stand alongside the other cuisine styles that are popular and well-supported. Despite a chronic economic crisis, Harare is well serviced by restaurants, coffee shops, cafes and the like, and we have a good mix of international cuisine styles, among them Portuguese, Italian, Chinese, Thai, Ethiopian, Greek and Japanese. I am always surprised we do not have a Vietnamese restaurant, seeing as this is the world’s fastest-growing international restaurant style, and I would love to see some Spanish, South American and Middle Eastern dining venues created, too. I was pleased to have a chance to meet Allen this time, and to hear his enthusiasm for what has been achieved and what he does in offering a mix of variety and quality at Gava’s. Gava is, of course, the fox, and this is the logo of the restaurant, but there’s nothing foxy about what can be enjoyed there. Also prominent on advertising and promotional material is the slogan Sadza With Soul, which I thought clever and appropriate. The restaurant is under a marquee and is serviced from the old bowling club, where a kitchen and the ‘facilities’ are situated. Close by is another marquee for extended sittings and a smaller one from which entertainers perform; this is usually on a Sunday or on special occasions, such as the public holiday on which we dined. My guest and I arrived early and found a seat close to the band, this time the outstanding Ovation and Fab Fusion group, who have gained a huge reputation for their range of music and their consistent excellent performance standard. Leading the singing was Faith Wyngard, a longstanding singer and stage performer, who sometimes perform with husband Brennan – as Fab Fusion — and sometimes in the extended band as they did this past weekend. We were looked after with an expert touch by the very charming and competent Ropafadzo Chinooneka, and within a short time, we were able to sample from a variety of the most popular dishes on the menu. I had previously had the whole bream and the guinea fowl (hanga), so we dispensed with these and instead had a mix of grilled half-chicken, oxtail, goat stew and beef bones supplemented by beans, rape, rape in peanut butter sauce, chips (for the chicken) and a plate of four sadzas, the best of which was the excellent mhunga. It was quite a spread and more than a little had to be packed for the home journey. The menu is fairly extensive and contains a great many local delights, and I know of a number of people from within the white and NGO/diplomatic community who make a regular point of dining there because they appreciate the insight they get into local cuisine, as well as the variety and the quality of the dishes provided. They also like the service they get from Allen’s team. The group of people at lunch when we were there was made up of exactly what Allen wants coming there: white, black (local and from other parts of Africa), Indian, mixed-race, Chinese … and every one of them enthused by the experience. Allen is an electronic engineer by profession and is not a chef or hospitality-trained, but he has surrounded himself by a team that knows what it is doing. I liked the experience, and enjoyed the unpretentious nature of what is being offered, to the extent that if tourists go there for a sampling of Zimbabwean cuisine, they will not be exposing themselves to what could best be described as a “packaged” or theatrical version of a local dining experience. Allen also told us he sources all his inputs from selected suppliers, rural and urban, who can provide regular deliveries and consistent standards themselves. Gava’s is open every day from 11.30am to 10pm, and is suitable to all customer types, including family groups. I have often been there when office group have been there for a lunch break, and have also seen airline crews and school groups out to supper. Prices are reasonable and parking is available no more than 25 metres from the dining area. More information and bookings from 0772 381863 or at gavasrestaurant@yahoo.com. • Do you have a favourite traditional Zimbabwean restaurant? If so, let me know. Feedback on this article and on anything to do with dining and cuisine to aquarius@iwayafrica.co.zw.   