© IT IS sad to note that the Zimbabwe Football Association, after all the negative things that took place at the Africa Cup of Nations finals in Cairo, Egypt, had the audacity to disband the senior men’s national football team — the Warriors — without even engaging in a process of self-introspection. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Zifa did not end there. They disbanded the Warriors technical team of Rahman Gumbo and Lloyd Mutasa, while coach Sunday Chidzambwa had already submitted to pressure and resigned.
As though this was not enough, Zifa’s ban extended to individuals who have already left local football administration with life bans being imposed on Philip Chiyangwa, Omega Sibanda and expulsion for Chamu Chiwanza. However, Zifa fell short of looking at themselves and possibly telling the nation about their contribution towards the Cairo fiasco. The failure by the Warriors may not only find its causative features on the field of play but also administrative bungling by the national association after the national side threatened not to fulfill all their fixtures in Egypt over nonpayment of their bonuses. Curiously, fund-raising activities during which Zimbabweans donated generously came up with significant amounts. The Confederation of African Football is also understood to have paid Zifa upfront to ensure the opening match between the Warriors and hosts Egypt had minimum disruptions. With all this baggage on their shoulders, Zifa found it prudent to look elsewhere for blame, obviously considering themselves as untainted saints. Less than a week ago, the Mighty Warriors — the senior female national soccer team — had to endure a punishing 1 300km trip by bus from Port Elizabeth to Johannesburg to catch a flight back home after being knocked out of the Cosafa Cup in the semi-finals. How on earth could a national association that cares about the welfare of its players fail to arrange return tickets for them? The Felton Kamambo-led executive cannot have their cake and eat it too. Zimbabweans still needs answers on the failed campaign in Cairo, Egypt. The preparations seemed fine but administrative bungling must have taken its toll on the players. These bans and other gymnastics Zifa are designing are only meant to distract people from real problems affecting our football.
In other places, the Zifa executive must have thrown in the towel even before Chidzambwa. At least taking the blame could have reasserted their dignity in a way.  