© Club 263 Kariba has opened its doors in the resort town and tonight the joint hosts a DJs bash featuring several top club DJs in a promising and eventful night dubbed “Cruise Control”. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Head of entertainment DJ Abra Nash said the party will revolve around easy tunes featuring hip-hop, Zimdancehall, house, naija, splash and lots more global genres. Tuku memorial concert on tonight
A mammoth gig has been lined up tonight in remembrance of the late music icon and national hero Oliver “Tuku” Mtukudzi. Slated for Glamis Arena in Harare, the gig features a number of entertainers among them sungura maestro Alick Macheso, Jah Prayzah and foreign acts Mi Casa, Amayenge and James Sakala. Police funfair on tomorrow
A number of entertainers will take part in the 2019 Commissioner-General of Police Funfair at Morris Depot. The event features sungura ace Alick Macheso, Jah Prayzah, Suluman Chimbetu, Killer T, The Charambas, Madzibaba Nicholas Zakaria and Andy Muridzo among several other entertainers. City Sports Bar features Zoey and Shinsoman
Harare’s premier nightclub, City Sport Bar will tonight host sexy pole dancer Zoey and Zimdancehall music star Shinsoman in a “bad boy, bad girl” clash of the week. Intwasa Arts Festival on tonight
The Intwasa Arts Festival is on tonight in Bulawayo with an array of entertainers set to showcase. The youth concert features Bulawayo’s finest Calvin, ASAPH, Iyasa, Madlela. Dancehall star Bazooker and Mbeu will be travelling for the event. Seh Calaz, Tipsy in Marondera
Dancehall music star Seh Calaz together with his protégé Tipsy will tomorrow drive to Marondera for a performance at Club Werras. The venue has become popular with revellers in the Mash East town. Peter lands at Prime Ruwa
Sungura bae Peter Moyo will tomorrow take his album Mwana Wemurozvi to his fans in Ruwa with a performance at Prime. Together with his Utakataka Express, they have managed to win the hearts of many with their energetic live display. Sulu off to Banket
Dendera musician Suluman Chimbetu will tonight travel to Banket with a performance at Kuwadzana Beer-hall. He returns to the capital on Saturday for a performance at police funfair. Zimstock Music Festival on tomorrow
Saturday, September 28, 2019, Hellenic School, will host the 6th edition of Zimstock Music Festival (ZMF). A festival created to give local artists a platform to showcase their music talent and celebrate the musical cultural diversity within Zimbabwe. Peace in the Hood Concert at Shoko Festival
The Peace in the Hood Festival running under the Shoko Festival 2019 will be held at the Community Hall Grounds in Unit L Chitungwiza on Sunday. This will be a platform for revellers to mix and mingle with rising as well as acclaimed artistes that hail from Chitungwiza. Baba Harare in Kadoma
Popular jiti musician Baba Harare will take his act to Kadoma for a performance at Kadoma Agricultural Show. He is readying a new album which he has titled Generator which will be out in November and is already sampling songs from the forthcoming project. Tryson settles for the capital
Dendera music star Tryson Chimbetu is in action this weekend with a performance at The Eland Pagango in Kuwadzana tonight. Tomorrow he performs at Usahwira Bar, Shirichena Shop in Western Triangle, Highfield. He will be supported by Uncle Sam at both shows. Bev at Londoners
Raunchy dancer Beverly “Bev” Sibanda is in action tonight as she entertains patrons at Londoners, Strathaven Shops. Bv Labien kwaGaza
Rhumba music lovers are in for a treat tonight with BV Labien in action at Ganya Nite Club at Gazaland shopping centre in Highfield. Andy Muridzo continues to whistle  
Andy Muridzo continues to take his album Shiri Yamambo to the people. Tonight he performs at Mahuni Bar. Tomorrow he will be at Bar Rouge at Long Cheng Plaza. Romeo on the move
Sungura musician Romeo Gasa will tonight drive to Mutare for a performance at Club Mandisa. Tomorrow he returns to the capital for a performance at Pamuzinda in the vicinity of Kuwadzana. On Sunday he shares the stage with Kapfupi at Club Lashers. Reggae Fiesta in Ruwa
The Reggae Fiesta will be held today at Club Manake in Ruwa featuring the Zimfest Reggae Band and Ras Satisfaction among others.  