© ZIMBABWE faces severe food shortages in its 2019-20 farming season as farmers are financially hamstrung due to the worsening liquidity crunch. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); With the rainy season approaching, most farmers cannot prepare adequately for the cropping season as prices of fertilisers, seed and other inputs continue to rise. The farmers’ incapacitation is a result of reduced returns and failure to secure working capital from banks in a country with a mechanisation deficit although Agriculture minister Perrance Shiri says a $10,5 million Agribank facility had been arranged.
Finance minister Mthuli Ncube has said government is capacitating farmers through Command Agriculture and the Agribank facility. Although Ncube promised $3 billion financing during his mid-term Budget, this is not enough to boost the sector. This comes after Parliament revealed that over $2 billion was siphoned last year from Treasury under the guise of funding Command Agriculture. Zimbabwe’s fertiliser companies currently need $2 billion to produce 400 000 tonnes of fertiliser this season while about 150 000 tonnes is reportedly locked up in consignment agreements pending release of forex. Dry weather conditions are the major cause of food insecurity, which is likely to worsen considerably because of the high cost in staple food prices; hence the country must come up with sustainable solutions. For long considered Africa’s breadbasket, Zimbabwe has seen its citizens going hungry in the past two decades and to avert the crisis, government is seeking US$3,2 billion emergency assistance, with the European Union announcing that it is providing an additional €10 million in funding to address the country’s growing humanitarian needs. Power challenges have worsened Zimbabwe’s farming situation, hampering uninterrupted irrigation thus affecting wheat and horticultural production. Government’s Accelerated Irrigation Programme — targeting the development of 200 hectares  per district per annum using existing and new dams — will not hold with these massive power disruptions, which compromise irrigation development. This year was also bad for the tobacco sector with a reported 55 percent drop in tobacco seed sales and poor prices at the auction floors, which have affected preparations for the coming crop. And because of the recent drought, maize farmers in particular did not harvest enough to sell and raise sufficient capital for inputs while loss of capital and productive assets through crop failure and livestock deaths throughout the country has been evident. The lack of locally available vaccines is affecting the national herd and Zimbabwe is currently importing vaccines to fight foot-and-mouth disease and brucellosis in cattle.  