© AFTER phasing out the Economic Structural Adjustment Programme (Esap) in 1995, the government introduced another economic blueprint, the Zimbabwe Programme for Economic and Social Transformation (Zimprest), whose major aim was to deepen market reforms in the absence of a supporting multi-lateral framework from the International Monetary Fund. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Zimprest was in force between 1998 and 2000 but the period was marred by poor economic performance and weak implementation of trade policies. Inconsistent trade policy regimes during this period resulted in the contraction of both manufacturing output and exports. Agriculture’s share of exports also fell substantially, reflecting the effects of the chaotic land reform programme that took place at the turn of the millennium. Other economic blueprints were introduced after Zimprest, but these were short-lived. The trajectory of Zimbabwe’s trade performance since independence leads one to conclude that trade liberalisation does not always lead to sustained export growth and the subsequent increase in societal welfare. Zimbabwe’s situation, however, also brings to the fore the fact that structural reforms are not necessarily an important prerequisite for export promotion, especially to achieve pro-poor, equitable growth and development. This means that budget deficits might be crowding out investment in Zimbabwe. Since 2000 the percentage growth in Fixed Capital Formation has been volatile, reaching an all-time high of 346 percent in 2007 before falling in 2008. Between 2009 and 2010, it reached another peak of 229,8 percent and was expected to be on the decline up to 2015. Due to hyperinflation after 2000, it was difficult to ascertain the growth in budget balance. However in 2010, the country experienced a growth of 126 percent of the budget balance.
It decreased to about -43,8 percent in 2011 and thereafter there was some moderation. There is also a positive relationship between Budget Balance and Fixed Capital Formation as a percentage of GDP.
This means a budget surplus will result in more funds being available for investment in the country. A recent survey showed that 26 percent of the respondents highlighted that both technical and funding challenges compromised policy implementation in Zimbabwe, while 60 percent and 14 percent indicated that inadequate financial and technical support respectively affect policy implementation. At least 76 percent of the respondents indicated that during Esap, leadership support and political will from ministries, government and the ruling party was available. Some respondents supported the availability of this support by citing government’s abandonment of the programme after realising the non-applicability of the policy instrument to Zimbabwe. However, 20 percent of the respondents felt there was inadequate leadership support and political will, with leadership seemingly adopting a hands-off approach and blaming the IMF for imposing Esap. Some respondents suggested that leadership under Esap should have done a situational analysis for the country. The survey showed that 46 percent of the respondents felt economic management in Zimbabwe was ineffective, while another 46 percent felt it was effective. However, eight percent of the respondents suggested that the type of economic management in Zimbabwe was average (somewhat effective and somewhat ineffective). This was due to the policy inconsistencies and lack of effective implementation strategies, which tended to render most of the country’s policies redundant. Some of the respondents felt a more concerted effort should have been placed on implementation through strong monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. This could have been done through intermediate evaluative, preemptive planning to allow policy modification in the management of the Zimbabwean economy. The annual review of the first five-year Medium Term Plan and the National Budget review statements were some of the documents which could have allowed for policy modifications, re-strategising and resetting of macro-economic targets. 
 (Kasiyamhuru is ZIPP president)  