© SuperSport United head coach Kaitano Tembo is over the moon after leading his side to their third consecutive MTN8 final following a 2-0 win over Tshwane rivals Mamelodi Sundowns on Wednesday night. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Teboho Mokoena and Jamie Webber found the back of the net for Matsatsantsa, who will now meet Highlands Parks in the final after their 4-3 penalty shootout win over Polokwane City. “We knew it was not going to be an easy game. We had to be a little bit patient and compact a little bit defensively and catch them on transition,” Tembo told reporters after the game. “They rested about nine players, we knew they had fresh legs. We made only one change from Saturday. “I’m very proud of the boys because they worked very hard. It’s not easy playing a team like Sundowns and you come out with a result like this.
“This season we’ve got goals coming in from different angles. Today we got two young midfielders scoring the goals and that’s what we have been preaching to have a lot of our attacking players contributing in terms of scoring goals. “It’s good to get to the final, but we need to do the job in the final. I’m happy for Bongani Khumalo because we knew they play a lot of diagonal balls, long balls, so we had to be strong aerially and he won a lot of aerial battles and that helped us a lot.” The Zimbabwean tactician was asked about the two controversial moments from the first stanza involving Gaston Sirino and two of his players, Dean Furman and Clayton Daniels.
“Those are tough decisions that sometimes referees have got to make. “You have to make those tough calls but I’m not sure what really happened, from what I heard, someone was slapped,” Tembo said. “We need to stamp that out a little bit out of our game. But at the same time, it’s emotions, it’s a derby, it’s normal.”
With the final now taking place at the Orlando Stadium in Soweto on October 5, Tembo is happy with the neutral venue. “It’s a cup final. It’s a neutral venue. We are happy to go there,” Tembo said.  
— KICK-OFF