© The African Medallion Group (AMG) is diversifying into renewable energy with the aim of becoming an industry leader, as it launches the African Energy Institute (AEI), which coincides with the start-up&#39;s expanding role as a global leader in developing opportunities for Africa by Africans. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); The purpose of the new institute is to create and integrate new solutions to challenges in energy sufficiency and sustainability.
The launch of the institute marks AMG&#39;s first foray into renewable energy. Financial details were not disclosed in the launch of the institute, which will be a prestigious platform with a mission to provide outstanding opportunities within the continent. Its aim is to create access for innovation and opportunities that enhance entrepreneurs’ acumen and personal development by uniting high-level knowledge with practical solutions, based on experience on the continent." said Frank Buyanga, the AMG founder, about the renewable energies business group. "In this global world, only by having a highly professional and open-minded platforms that incorporate a strong sense of ethics and responsibilities can one remain competitive." Buyanga, who has moved his AMG head office from South Africa to Dubai for the market’s centrality and other strategic reasons, said with the costs of creating electricity from solar power and wind continuing to fall, electricity from renewable energy will soon be
consistently cheaper, this is according to the world&#39;s renewable energy agency. The renewable energy industry has started to consolidate after struggling in 2009 with a dearth of financing for new projects and a steep fall in prices." By 2020, most wind and solar power technology now being commercially used will be priced in the same range as fossil fuels,&quot; Buyanga said. "That is particularly good news for communities in parts of Africa, Asia and other parts of the world that remain unconnected to power grids and without access to modern energy. If there is cheaper and improved technology, combined with new financial arrangements to help, as Africa, we should be able to get more unconnected communities access to clean power." The cost of producing renewable energy has fallen consistently since 2010, with wind and solar panels leading the way - and in some cases falling in price by as much as 73 percent over that period, according to international research. In 2016 alone, more than 160-gigawatts of renewable energy capacity was added to the world energy mix, or a nearly 9 percent increase. Around 70 percent of that increase came in developing countries, with Asia accounting for 58 percent and Africa 12 percent.
"We believe we can do more," Buyanga said. The businessman is a gold investor, with over a decade of experience. The new initiative, he said, was created because technological advances, competitive procurement, and a large base
of experienced, internationally active project developers are the main drivers to lower costs." If you have working and scalable ideas, please do get in touch. Going forward, we will continue to communicate regularly through our platforms and provide new details and notifications, " he said. This comes as AMG&#39;s gold reserves have surpassed the R1 billion mark, making it an attractive buy for gold investors. In May, the AMG won the Global Academy of Psychological Sciences award, with the 40 year-old entrepreneur challenging regional capitals to increase beneficiation of minerals for employment creation and other economic benefits as well as “claim their place in
determining commodity prices and not be price takers”. In line with his desire to see the continent benefitting more from its resources, the South African-based philanthropist has also made an enticing offer to fund Zimbabwe Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF), which has stalled since 2014. AMG has been continually adding more gold to its reserves through purchases made from the Rand Refinery, the South African firm that is one of the world’s largest gold refineries and
refines most of Africa’s gold. Through such platforms as the Pan African Business Forum – where he seats as an executive director responsible for entrepreneurship – the Johannesburg-based businessman has not only tried to impart some of his skills, but seek to “expand the entrepreneurial spirit by educating African peers to shun begging for help and instead concentrate on ways of generating value from the region’s endowments.” He was three months ago inducted as an ambassador for the Youth
Leadership Entrepreneurship, in recognition of his undying desire to grow young people and become successful entrepreneurs,with the continental honour  conferred on him in Ghana by the Pan African Leadership Foundation, whose mission is to transform society by nurturing young leaders.  