© THE ZIMBABWE Election Support Network (Zesn) has implored the Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission to investigate reports of vote buying that were reported in the Glen View South by-election, as well as in previous by-elections that were held post -2018 harmonised elections. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Zesn also urged the Zimbabwe Election Commission (Zec) to display voters’ rolls outside polling stations in future elections to enable easy identification of voters’ correct polling stations. Currently, this practice is still at the pilot phase. The election monitoring body also wants political parties to “create structures, mechanisms and policies that facilitate the nomination of a more diverse range of candidates during the internal party primaries. “This will make the process more inclusive. Political parties should invest in the recruitment, training and deployment of their party agents to allow parties to comment authoritatively on election day processes. Political parties should improve the quality of their campaign efforts to support improvement in the turnout of voters during by-elections.” Meanwhile, Electoral Commission (ZEC) conducted two National Assembly by-elections Glen View South, Mangwe and one Local Authority By-election in Masvingo Rural District Council (Ward 1). All three by elections, were held on 7 September 2019 to fill vacancies that arose following the deaths of the respective incumbents. ZESN conducts its observation efforts in conformity with Zimbabwe’s electoral laws, the Declaration of Global Principles for Citizen Election Observation and Monitoring which was launched by the United Nations on 3 April 2012 as well as the Principles for Election Management, Monitoring and Observation in the SADC Region (PEMMO). The findings and recommendations of this election observation are made in reference to the laws of Zimbabwe, the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Principles and Guidelines Governing Democratic Elections as well as other regional and African election standards. The Zimbabwe Election Support Network (ZESN) deployed comprehensively to the Glen View South by-election, while observers were deployed to all ward collation centres in Mangwe. In Ward 1 of Masvingo RDC observers were deployed to cover three polling stations and the ward collation centre.  A total of 56 static and mobile observers were deployed to the three by-elections to assess the electoral processes at the respective polling stations and collation centres as well as the political environment around the Constituency and Wards where the by-elections were held. Prior to the Election Day, ZESN deployed Long Term Observers (LTOs) to track electoral and political developments that occurred during the campaign season for the Glen View South, Mangwe and Masvingo RDC (Ward 1). ZESN’s observation methodology allowed the Network to measure compliance of the Election Day processes with the Constitution, Electoral Laws as well as regional and international standards. Compliance of electoral contestants to the code of conduct for elections, and electoral preparations by the Commission were also assessed by ZESN’s LTOs. The Glen View South, Mangwe and Masvingo RDC (Ward 1) by-elections were held within the prescribed timeframes. The Constitution, Electoral Act, Statutory Instruments and Regulations form part of the Legal framework governing the conduct of by-elections. The Legal framework requires that set polling dates comply with both section 158(3) and 159 of the Constitution, and section 39 of the Electoral Act, both require voting in a by-election to be held within 90 days of the vacancy occurring. Voter education is an important component of the election cycle as it ensures that the electorateunderstand their rights, political systems, how and where to vote. For an election to be successful and democratic, voters must fully understand their rights and responsibilities, and must be sufficiently knowledgeable and well informed to cast ballots that are legally valid and to participate meaningfully in the voting process. ZESN’s team of voter educators in Glen View South Constituency comprised representatives seconded by ZESN members1.  The team provided voter education from 28 to 30 August 2019. The main objective was to mobilize voters to go and exercise their right to vote in peace on Election Day. In the VE exercise, 5000 posters and 1000 flyers were distributed. The team targeted community hall meetings, church gatherings and public places. The team also employed the door to door strategy in the Constituency. This was complemented by the setting up of Zimbrellas that were strategically located at shopping centres for the distribution of materials and information sharing targeted at those who were vending or away from home. A Zimbrella is a mobile information kiosk manned by voter educators. Zimbrellas were set up at Glen View 1 shopping centre, Glen View District offices, and in Amalinda (part of GlenView). In Mangwe Constituency the ZESN team comprised five voter educators who were drawn from ZESN members with active programming in Matabeleland South2 and one Community Based Organisation based in the same Constituency. The team covered 10 of the 15 wards namely (1, 3, 13, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, 17) from 28 to 31 August 2019. The team addressed multitudes at various gatherings and distributed Information Education and Communication Material which included pamphlets and fliers. Voter registration is provided for in Section 17A of the Electoral Act (Chapter 2:13).  In keeping with the requirement to provide voter registration continuously, ZEC established registration centres at its Provincial and District offices to facilitate continuous registration by voters throughout the electoral cycle. In addition to continuous voter registration, ZEC is ceased with the task of cleaning the voters’ roll using the information obtained from the Registrar General3.  The two processes account for the slight changes in the 2018 and 2019 registration figures for the two constituencies and the ward where the by-elections were conducted. In 2018 Mangwe Constituency had a voter population of 18 910 of which 11 930 were females.  The voters’ roll for the 2019 by-election had a voter population of 18 794 of which 11 883 were females, (representing a reduction of 116 persons). In 2018 Glen View South Constituency had 20 269 voters while, the 2019 voters’ roll increased to 20 350 (representing an additional 81 persons). Voters enjoyed the right to assemble peacefully as all parties held their respective rallies without any interference. Political parties were able to organize and persuade voters to elect their candidates to office. Electoral contestants in both Mangwe and Glen View South by-election conducted vibrant campaigns which included rallies, door to door meetings, use of posters and fliers.  The other candidates held a series of meetings and conducted door to door meetings and distributed leaflets. As with previous by-elections, ZANU-PF and MDC-Alliance had the most visible campaigns comprising rallies and meetings which were addressed by the two parties’ senior leadership. ZESN observer reports during the Masvingo RDC ward 1 by-election indicate that ZANU PF held rallies and meetings while the MDC alliance relied mostly on door to door meetings. Election campaigns in Zimbabwe are regulated by a Code of Conduct for Political Parties as contained in the Fourth schedule of the Electoral Act. The Fourth schedule guarantees that everyone has the right to freely express their political opinion, campaign and canvass for membership and support from voters. ZESN observers also noted that during the Masvingo RDC by-election ZANU-PF conducted primary elections while the MDC alliance appointed their 2018 harmonised elections candidate for the same council election. In Mangwe, ZANU PF initially planned to hold primary elections for aspiring candidates for the by-election. Five candidates applied, three were disqualified leaving two women. The primary elections were then called off and the party unanimously agreed to let one of the two aspiring candidates to represent the party in the by-election. The female candidate who was selected was the surviving spouse of the former Member of Parliament for Mangwe Constituency, whose death created the vacancy. The MDC Alliance and ZAPU nominated their respective parties 2018 harmonised election candidates for the same constituency. ZESN observer reports indicate that no primary elections were held for other political parties that contested the Mangwe by-election. The pre-election environment in the three by-elections was peaceful, without reported cases of violence. However, other forms of malpractices were observed. In Glen View South, ZESN was concerned with the timing of the drilling of 15 boreholes by the District Development Fund (DDF) which ZANU-PF seemingly took advantage of during its campaigns ahead of a by-election as the party was observed officiating at some of the boreholes in the Constituency. DDF trucks carrying borehole rigs were observed moving in convoys with vehicles carrying ZANU-PF supporters in their full party regalia heading for the borehole drilling sites. ZANU-PF also distributed rice in the Constituency until a day before the election. This amounts to vote buying or an attempt to influence voting preferences with an effect to make the electoral playing field uneven. Political parties can play a critical role of facilitating the political participation of women in politics. For instance parties determine which candidate can be nominated, be put on their party list and at which position. Political parties in the country still need to do more to encourage women to participate as electoral contestants. Two (2) or the nine (9) electoral contestants in both Mangwe and Glen View South were women while Masvingo RDC Ward 1 was only contested by men. Set up and Opening of Polling Stations ZESN observers reported that ZEC posted the voters’ roll outside all polling stations in all the three by-elections. This administrative reform is commendable as it enables the easy identification of polling stations by voters. Polling stations were set up in accordance with the requirements of the law, in a manner that ensured that voters could mark their ballots in secrecy. ZESN observers also reported that essential voting materials such as ballot boxes, ballot papers, ZEC stamp, indelible marking pens, and biometric voters’ roll were present at all polling stations observed in the three by-elections. Furthermore, observers reported that all the polling stations opened on time and had started processing voters by 7.15 am. All the polling stations were reported to be easily accessible to everyone, including people with disabilities. On average, there were seven polling officers per polling station. ZESN Observers reported that the voting process in the by-elections proceeded smoothly at all polling stations with procedures such as showing ballot boxes to be empty, checking voters’ names against the voters’ roll, examining voters’ fingers for indelible ink and applying the ink, issuance of stamped ballot papers and other key procedures being duly followed. In addition, observers reported that all voters were required to present identification documents before voting with those having defaced or invalid identification such as driver’s licenses and expired passports being turned away. While the posting of the voters’ roll outside polling stations as done in the by-elections is commendable, significant numbers of redirected voters continued to be observed. There is therefore need for ZEC to assign to an officer at the polling station the role to inform voters that they need to check their names on the voters’ roll displayed outside polling stations. The Commission could also notify voters whose registration would have been changed ahead of time, for example via text messages. Some polling stations also recorded high numbers of turned away voters. Glen View 9B Primary polling station notably recorded 55, followed by 53 turned away voters at Glen View 9A Primary as at 6.00 pm. Many of these people were however from Glen Norah Constituency, which boarders with Glen View South.  During the 2018 harmonized elections the same polling station (whose unique IDs are 6301HRE2807 B and 6301HRE2807 A) were used for Glen Norah Constituency and this may have contributed to the confusion resulting in persons from Glen Norah showing up to vote. The numbers of redirected voters were much lower in Mangwe and Masvingo. For instance the highest recorded in Mangwe as at 6.00 pm was seven. There was one incident of a ZANU-PF supporter who was turned away for showing up wearing party regalia on Election Day at Glen View 3BB polling station. The Electoral Code of Conduct for Political Parties under Schedule 7 (1) (d) on conduct during polling period stipulates that “No political party or candidate may, from midnight twenty-four hours before polling day in any election or referendum until polling stations are closed on that day—campaign or display campaign material within 300 metres of a polling station or counting centre.” ZESN commends ZEC for the action they took in keeping with the provisions of the Code of Conduct as well as Section 146 of the Electoral Act which also prohibits the wearing of party symbols on polling day. Relatively low numbers of assisted voters were recorded in Glen View South Constituency. By contrast, the number of assisted voters was high in Mangwe, especially on account of old age and visual impairment. ZESN observers reported that, almost 100 voters had been assisted to vote on account of visual impairment at 15 polling stations in Mangwe. The network calls for the introduction of tactile braille packets to allow visually impaired voters to vote on their own. In terms of the law, political parties and candidates can deploy one election agent inside the polling station and an additional agent within the vicinity of a polling station. ZESN continues to encourage political parties to comprehensively deploy agents to observe electoral processes on their behalf. ZANU-PF and MDC A deployed party agents comprehensively in Glen View South Constituency while the other parties deployed to selected polling stations. For Mangwe, ZANU-PF and MDC A deployed party agents at all polling stations where ZESN had observers while the MDC-T and other political parties deployed to some of the polling stations. The political environment on Election Day was generally serene; this is commendable given the large number of electoral contestants and the high stakes particularly in the Glen View South by-election. Voter turnout in the three by-elections was low with Glen View South Constituency recording a voter turnout of 25%, in Mangwe the turnout was 36,8% while  the turnout for Masvingo RDC ward 1 was 63,4%. An additional factor accounting for the low turnout can be the cold, windy and cloudy weather conditions that prevailed across the country on the day the by-elections were held and the general voter apathy that ZESN has consistently observed in by-elections. ZESN implores political parties to deliberately educate their supporters on the importance of participating in by-elections. Perhaps broadening the period that other players are allowed to conduct voter education may help increase the reach of voter education efforts. ZEC may consider allowing CSOs to conduct voter education for by-elections from the time Presidential Proclamations are made to the date of the by-election. ZESN observers were permitted to observe counting and results collation at all polling stations where they were stations. Tables 1, 2, and 3 below compare the by-elections with the previous (2018) elections results for Glen View South Constituency, Mangwe Constituency, and Ward 1 of Masvingo RDC. Following the observations highlighted in the report ZESN proffers the following recommendations. ZESN implores the Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission to investigate reports of vote buying that were reported in the Glen View South by-election, as well as in previous by-elections that were held post 2018 harmonized elections. ii. The ZEC should adopt the displaying of voters’ rolls outside polling stations in future elections to enable easy identification of voters’ correct polling stations. Currently, this practice is still at the pilot phase. iii. ZESN urges political parties to create structures, mechanisms and policies that facilitate the nomination of a more diverse range of candidates during the internal party primaries. This will make the process more inclusive.  iv. Political parties should invest in the recruitment, training and deployment of their party agents to allow parties to comment authoritatively on Election Day processes. v. Political parties should improve the quality of their campaign efforts to support improvement in the turnout of voters during the by-elections. vi. Tactile braille templates should be developed to facilitate enjoyment of secrecy of the vote by persons with visual impairment. vii. ZEC should conduct periodic voter registration blitz and avail voter registration centers at the sub district level to facilitate registration by persons that were unable to register during previous voter registration blitz. viii. ZEC should consider broadening the period that other players are allowed to conduct voter education, this may help increase the reach of voter education efforts. 2.1. Introduction ZESN continues to engage with Government and other electoral stakeholders in pursuit of appropriate political, electoral and legislative reforms that can foster the creation of a more enabling environment for credible elections. ZESN will continue to invest in observation of electoral processes throughout the electoral cycle and will be making evidence based recommendations on all electoral processes that it will observe.  