© GOVERNMENT should declare the Harare water crisis a national disaster as council shut its main water works on Monday, citing shortages of foreign currency to import treatment chemicals. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); The declaration will help the City of Harare to pool resources with the help of international donors and corporates. As a result of the shutdown, over two million Harare residents will have no access to running water, raising the risk of water-borne diseases like cholera, which will cost the city more to contain thus putting a further strain on the country’s stuttering health delivery system. Last year, 26 people died following a cholera outbreak in the capital due to burst sewers and inadequate water supplies. Already, most Harare residents depend on shallow wells and boreholes, which could run dry as the water table retreats because the city fathers have allowed settlements on wetlands.
Harare has been struggling — over the years — to meet demand of around 1 200 million litres as it was only producing around 450 litres a day. While Harare’s water infrastructure — which it has failed to upgrade — was designed to service 350 000 people; it has now been stretched to service around 2 million residents. Harare claims it is owed $987 million in unpaid bills, which it argues is constraining its capacity to provide adequate services. Water treatment chemicals, the city also claims, chew $3 million a month as upstream towns release domestic, sewage, agricultural and mining waste into the rivers that feed the capital’s dams. However, its monthly collections range between $13 million and $20 million and expenditure of $35 million on water treatment chemicals, $12 million on salaries and $8 million on fuel means Harare is overshooting its monthly revenue by $35 million. The 2018 drought has led to Harava, Seke, Chivero and Manyame dams — which supply Harare with raw water — running dry, forcing council to decommission the Prince Edward water treatment plant, leaving only Morton Jaffray to supply Harare and its satellite towns. The current water crisis calls for concerted efforts from council and all stakeholders, including the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the government. As it stands, Harare is not an ideal tourist destination because of its water situation. Equally, the government and council should be reminded that access to water is a constitutional right that has to be enjoyed by everyone. This crisis should also be a wake-up call for council to plan ahead to avert such situations.  