© Chikopokopo lands in Budiriro
Sungura giant Alick Macheso will tonight reunite with his following in the capital after two weeks away. Tonight he performs at Charehwa Matombo in Budiriro 2 and tomorrow he drives to Mutoko for a performance at Madzeka. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Peter gets Vicious
YOUNG Igwe Peter Moyo is celebrating his new album Mwana WeMurozvi tonight in the capital at Club Vicious (PaHuku) in Hillside while on Saturday he has a private engagement in Zvishavane. Baba Harare delivers sugar in Harare
Jiti musician Baba Harare continues to cement his relationship with music lovers as he takes his act to Club Manucho in Waterfalls (Pazindoga) tonight. On Sunday he will be in Epworth at Landmark Bar at Chiremba Shops where he will be supported by Senator Tichareva. Freeman, Calaz at Jongwe  
Dancehall stars Freeman and Seh Calaz will tomorrow combine forces for a gig at Jongwe Corner in Hatfield. Dubbed the Big Boys Business, the gig promises to be a thriller as both artistes are big in their own right. Hope Masike launches new album
MBIRA music sensation Hope Masike is unveiling her new 12-track studio album The Exorcism of a Spinster tonight at Reps Theatre in the capital. The Exorcism of a Spinster will be Masike’s third project in a career spanning more than a decade. Her first studio was album was released in 2009 and she named it after herself Hope. 
The debut project was followed by Mbira, Love and Chocolate in 2012 respectively. The event will be graced by several artists including renowned story-teller Ignatius Mabasa, Fadzai Katanda and Filbert Marova among others. Kuda Mutsvene for Women conference
GOSPEL musician Kuda Mutsvene, brother to gospel sensation Mercy Mutsvene, will perform alongside a host of other musicians at ladies conference this weekend. Dubbed Arise O Deborah, the conference being organised by the United Kingdom-based ‘‘prophetess’’ Hadassah Caroline will run from Friday (today) through to Sunday at Nelson Mandela Hall, Agricultural Society Exhibition Park, in the capital. The event will feature Dr Solomon Guramatunhu, who will be coming as one of the key speakers, and the Kalawa band among others. Manicaland weekend highlights
MONTCLAIR Casino is hosting Miss Tourism Manicaland beauty pageant on Saturday with musical performances by Zimdancehall sensation Enzo Ishall and afro-fusion songstress Diana Samukange. DJ Ranga and Candyman take turns to entertain revellers at Madziro bar along Mutare-Masvingo highway on Saturday. Ntswai ntswai mbira ensemble entertains guests at Holiday inn tomorrow. Andy Muridzo on the drive
Singer Andy Muridzo tonight drives to Filabusi for a performance at Club 727. Tomorrow he drives to Mberengwa for a performance at Donhodza Night Club and completes the weekend with a performance at Club Vatican in Zvishavane. Allan at Food Nest
Dendera music godfather Allan Chimbetu continues leading the way and tonight he entertains patrons in the capital with an act at Food Nest in the heart of Long Cheng Plaza in Belvedere. Rhumba treat at Warren Park 1
Rhumba music lovers are in for a treat this Sunday as rhumba outfit BV Labien entertain patrons at Warren Park 1 Bar. The gig is a free event according to the promotional poster. Jean Masters, Lovezh at East Point
Musicians Jean Masters and Lovezh continue to cement their working relationship and tonight they will take their act to East Point in the capital. Zoey and Progress in Chivi
Musicians Progress Chipfumo and Tendai Dembo will tonight combine forces with dancers Zoey and Wasu for a performance at Mudamburi Night Club in Chivi. Pramastove pamastones
Dancer and comedian Pramastove will tomorrow entertain patrons at Panzvimbo Bar in Highfield (Pamastones). He will be supported by club DJs. Mbira treat at Arcadia Shops
Mbira music lovers are in for a treat at Arcadia Shops as Mbira Dzechirorodziwa performs at Perlagos Liquor Centre. Queen Juicy in Chinhoyi
Queen Juicy and Hot Blingz will leave patrons in Chinhoyi drooling as they perform at Club Empire tomorrow. On Friday she brings juiciness at the Country Flavour Bar in the capital opposite Road port.  