© WHEN she left the mining town of Kwekwe in 2007 in search of greener pastures in Australia, Susan Vivian Mutami expected to find world class health services and facilities in her new home. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); While in her mind jobs, education, health and other essential services were easily available in the developed world, she was surprised to find that like Zimbabwe, Australia is struggling to provide health services for all its citizens, with those in rural areas being the most affected. As a mother and qualified health practitioner, Mutami was touched by the number of children who die in Australia annually after failing to access health services. Being an innovative young woman, the 30-year-old has over the past two years introduced mobile hospitals in Australia’s remote areas to help citizens, especially children, access health services and is working on bringing the initiative back home. Mutami, who holds a bachelor of social sciences degree in security and counter terrorism and a bachelor of Nursing degree and advanced diploma of leadership and management, said she started working on the initiative in March 2017 and proposed it to the Australian government a year later. “I came up with the idea after my research showed that there was a high infant mortality rate of indigenous Australians (child deaths 153,6 per 100 000) as compared to non-indigenous (73,2 deaths). “I believe no one in a first world country should die because of not being able to access healthcare services when we have all the resources plus a world class healthcare system. The moving hospitals are fitted with the latest medical equipment and technology,” she said. Mutami told the Daily News on Sunday that she also decided to embark on the initiative to ensure the safety of medical practitioners following reports of community nurses who were murdered in her area. She said her state-of-the-art mobile hospitals are fully fledged health institutions on wheels that have medical practitioners including doctors, nurses and physiotherapists. “The medical practitioners work with the Royal Flying Doctor service of Australia in the rural, remote and regional parts of Australia. 
“The Royal Flying Doctor service is one of the largest aero medical organisations in the world that has a total of 71 aircraft covering the length and breadth of the country,” she said. A mother of one, Mutami’s schedule is always busy such that she cannot afford to come back home as often as she would want. However, she said her dream is to extend her initiative to Zimbabwe where health delivery is a major challenge. Before bringing mobile hospitals to Zimbabwe, she said the country’s Health ministry has to put the right fundamentals in place to improve the situation.
“To improve the healthcare system in Zimbabwe there is need for the ministry of Health to be restructured and to be fit for purpose. There is need for sector reform in the pharmaceutical industry to allow local industries to manufacture medicines locally. “More emphasis from the ministry must be towards prevention of diseases because in Zimbabwe there is an increase in non-communicable diseases. There should be more awareness campaigns and education,” she added.
Last week, Mutami was honoured at the 100 Women of Influence Awards in Australia for her sterling work in that country. Giving her speech in Sydney, she urged women to always work together and give each other support to succeed in a male-dominated world. “I sincerely believe this recognition bestowed on me shall go a long way in awakening and inspiring women from diverse backgrounds and walks of life to prove beyond doubt that if given the opportunity, women can make dreams come true. “Together as one, with the requisite support, all barriers will be broken and women shall realise new ground. My strategic vision is to see women holding the bull by the horns in our endeavour to break barriers,” she said. Last year, Mutami was also honoured at the CEO magazine executive awards in Sydney for her contribution to the Australian health system. She attributes her success to the support she gets from her husband, friends and colleagues.
Mutami grew up in a middle class family and she said her father, Moore Mutami, worked very hard and sent her to good schools. 
She told the Daily News on Sunday that her family shaped the type of woman she is today. “I grew up in a very supportive and loving family where we were taught to love, respect, be humble and share the little that we had. “Unfortunately my father died in a car accident in May 2005. I wish he could have lived to see all my success. I know he would have been so proud considering the sacrifices he made to make sure I had all the books that I needed at school even though I was a very playful but focused individual.” Mutami did her primary education at Fitchlea in Kwekwe (1995-2001), and high school at Loreto in Silobela (2002-2005).  