© POLITICAL parties in Zimbabwe must be regulated to ensure that they adhere to a certain legal and normative framework in terms of internal functioning, financing and code of conduct. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); The regulation of political parties must be genuine and meant to enhance party systems, inter-party relations and build stronger organisations. In an insightful paper produced by Zimbabwe Election Support Network (Zesn) titled “Zesn Position Paper on Political Party Regulation in Zimbabwe”, the elections watchdog opines that for political parties to add value to Zimbabwe’s democracy and development policy agenda, there is a need for a strong regulatory framework governing their registration, deregistration, functioning, funding and accountability. As a result, Zesn says political parties exhibit signs such as fragility and structural weaknesses, lack of adherence to formal rules, regulations, procedures and programmes, leadership centred on dominant personality, family or clique, a strong tendency to break up a weak and unreliable financial and human resource base and lack of activity except at election time. This is an anomaly that has been allowed for far too long in Zimbabwe and as a result, the country suffers from election-related disputes and conflict, volatile party system and lack of political party accountability. The lack of political party regulation also places a huge burden and expectation on the Zimbabwe Election Commission (Zec) as it has to consult all organisations that identify themselves as political parties. This is both administratively and logistically challenging and very costly because Zec can never plan and budget accurately in the absence of a properly compiled political parties database. For instance, during the 2018 harmonised elections, Zec reported that it had 112 political parties on its register by March 15, 2018. The other effect of non-regulation of political parties is their proliferation, which as indicated above, resulted in about 127 political parties as at May 2018. This proliferation has led to a volatile party system in Zimbabwe.  Firstly, it has negative implications on the vertical relations between political parties and society. In other words, because these parties are formed by people who are not motivated by the needs and aspirations of the people, they become very weak and most importantly, they do not have roots in society. Secondly, the proliferation evinces the frailties of interparty (horizontal) relations. It has created hostilities between the parties and splinter parties as witnessed in the case of the numerous divisions. Zesn notes that individuals who are disgruntled within parties form new ones usually around election time. Equally, people who think they can access quick money through elections form political parties regardless of whether they have support or whether they stand for anything beneficial for the country. In fact, there are no registration fees required for one to register a political party in Zimbabwe as only parties and candidates that decide to contest in an election are required to pay administration registration fees at the nomination courts. As determined by Zec in terms of Section 47 of the Electoral Act 6 of 2018,  “At the same time as the nomination paper is lodged in terms of section 46 there shall be deposited with the nomination officer, by or on behalf of the person nominated, such nomination fee as may be prescribed, which shall form part of the funds of the commission”. The elections watchdog states that the main problem with the Zimbabwe legal framework is that it affirms the existence of political parties and even commit as the Political Parties (Finance) Act does, utilisation of public funds to cater for their operations after being elected to serve in Parliament. Yet, none of the legislations speak about how political parties come about, are managed and held accountable. The fact that the law provides for public funding of organisations whose operations are not regulated anywhere is a major weakness of the Zimbabwean political set-up in comparison to other contexts where political parties are regulated and held accountable. There are also countries that have specific legislation that governs the registration, operations, funding and accountability of political parties as well as legislation establishing an oversight mechanism in the form of the office of the Registrar of Political Parties. Kenya and Tanzania offer a good example in this category. Key considerations in both countries have been to ensure a level political playing field and to curb inter-party, ethnic and election-related conflict. Zesn also recommends that the legal clauses that ban private funding of parties must be amended and a comprehensive campaign and party funding law promulgated based on best practices.  