© Coin manufacturing giant Cape Mint has given Sam Nujoma - the founding president of Namibia - a huge, gold-embossed medal made by its master engravers for successfully leading his country for 15 years since its independence from South Africa, and stepping down to hand over power to his elected successor, Hifikepunye Pohamba. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); The Cape Mint is a world class mint that is based in Cape Town, South Africa and manufactures proof quality coins for numismatic collectors and dealers worldwide as well as medals and awards for societies and organisations. Cape Mint's general manager Howard Steenkamp, handed the gift to the Namibian revolutionary, anti-apartheid activist and politician who served three terms as the first President of Namibia, from 1990 to 2005 and was also a founding member and the first president of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) in 1960. "The Cape Mint's general manager, Mr Howard Steenkamp presents a gift, especially crafted by The Cape Mint, to His Excellency Dr Samuel Daniel Sam Nujoma (The Founding Father and first President of Namibia)," said a statement by Cape Mint, which works with governments, corporate entities and dealers globally.
Cape Mint noted Nujoma's role in transforming Namibia's people and economy. At independence in 1990, Namibia was gravely divided as a result of a century of colonialism, dispossession, and racial discrimination, compounded by armed struggle and propaganda. SWAPO had been so demonised by the colonial media and by official pronouncements that most white people, as well as many members of other groups, regarded the movement with the deepest fear, loathing, and suspicion. One of Nujoma's earliest achievements was to proclaim the policy of "national reconciliation", which aimed to improve and harmonise relations amongst Namibia's various racial and ethnic groups. Under his presidency, Namibia made steady if unspectacular economic progress, maintained a democratic system with respect for human rights, observed the rule of law, and worked steadily to eradicate the heritage of apartheid in the interests of developing a non-racial society. Nujoma successfully united all Namibians into a peaceful, tolerant and democratic society governed by the rule of law. The Cape Mint has a rich history in South Africa, and is known for manufacturing and supplying high quality mint, including the Black Rod of the SA parliament in 2005. Cape Mint has also unfurled a three year deal in which the company, affiliated to the Frank Buyanga-led African Medallion Group (AMG), manufactured and distributed Invictus medallions, inscribed with Springbok players' faces, including captain Siya Kolisi. Saturday will mark the first appearance in the world cup rugby final for both South Africa and England since they played each other in the 2007 decider in Paris - won by the Springboks. The medallions have brought razzmatazz to the South Africa side which reached their third world cup final after beating the Wales last weekend, having lifted the trophy in 1995 and 2007. The limited edition coins range if Invictus medallions come in a range of base finish, from fine silver to a base metal proof finish and have been snapped up by shoppers during the duration of the ongoing World Cup rugby tournament in Japan.  