© WITH three years until the next general election, Zimbabwe should seriously consider political finance reforms, encompassing both political party finance and campaign finance, election watchdogs contend. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); During the 30 July 2018 harmonised election, the Zimbabwe Election Support Network (Zesn) and other observer groups reported an uneven access to sources of political party funding, the absence of a regulatory framework for political finance, the misuse of state resources and vote-buying. These issues exacerbated what was already an uneven playing field for political competition. In response to these findings, the observer groups have suggested a series of recommendations that could help to address these issues should there be the political will to do so. Zesn has also produced an insightful paper titled ‘Zesn Position Paper on Political Finance’. However, while regional and international standards require states to adopt measures to ensure transparency in political finance, in order to promote a level playing field for elections and prevent political corruption, the development of regulatory frameworks, as well as their effective implementation and enforcement, remain a global challenge. Political finance expert Magnus Ohman has identified the main problems related to political finance in Africa as the uneven playing field between the government and other political parties; abuse of state resources; clientelism; vote-buying; illicit funding, including related to organised crime; dependency on foreign funding; and issues caused by a largely cash-based system. In Zimbabwe, political parties that reach five per cent of the vote in an election are provided with public funding for their ongoing activities. However, there are no mechanisms for providing transparency in how these funds are spent, as there are no reporting requirements. The law does regulate who is permitted to make private financial contributions – i.e. citizens, permanent residents, companies, and associations.  As for campaign finance, while there are spending limits, there are no requirements to report spending, so it is not possible to know if they have been exceeded. Zesn national director Rindai Vava-Chipfunde said while Zimbabwe has almost no regulatory framework for campaign finance, there are a number of positive measures it could take, in line with the findings and recommendations of observer groups following the 2018 elections. “Zesn recommends that the first step could be to provide transparency in the existing system of public funding for political parties. This would require a reporting mechanism to be established and an oversight body to be assigned responsibility for monitoring political party compliance with the requirements and enforcing any sanctions.  Such a framework would allow authorities to effectively monitor the existing provisions that prohibit foreign funding of political parties as well as the spending limit for political parties.” Zesn recommends the convening of an inclusive roundtable to consider the current Zimbabwean political finance system, as well as other relevant experiences from the region. “There is need to agree on a set of priority reforms related to political finance and develop an advocacy campaign. Identify opportunities to engage key decision-makers such as the Minister of Justice, Chair of the Zimbabwe Election Commission and MPs on this issue and explain why it is crucial for transparency and accountability in the political system.” Vava-Chipfunde  said during the 30 July 2018 Harmonised Elections in Zimbabwe, Zesn reported that the ruling party Zanu PF unfairly benefited from the misuse of government resources, such as vehicles, helicopters and state media, resulting in an uneven playing field.  Zanu PF also had access to government venues for campaigning. Zimbabwe International Election Observation Mission (ZIEOM) commented that Zanu PF campaigned with little differentiation between the State and the party, and pointed out that the Electoral Act does not address the use of state resources for campaigning purposes. It further commented that Zanu PF’s reliance on government school buildings, supplies, personnel, and vehicles during the campaign exacerbated the resource disparity among ruling and opposition parties. The EU EOM similarly reported the ‘extensive use of state resources and advantage of incumbency across the country’. Zesn reported vote-buying during the pre-election period, while ZIEOM commented that ‘the distribution of food aid or agricultural inputs such as seeds, fertilizer, and livestock, through the Presidential Inputs Scheme was commonly used as a method of influencing or coercing voters in rural areas’. Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission (ZHRC) similarly criticised the government’s distribution of food aid and Presidential Farming Inputs for political purposes during the election period. Zesn also noted that only Zanu PF and MDC-T qualified for public funding, and even so, the MDC Alliance faced funding challenges. The EU EOM noted that ‘there was a huge disparity in campaign financing and, Zanu PF dominated all forms of campaigning across the country, including through billboards, posters, distribution of regalia, rallies and road shows. It further noted that independent candidates are not entitled to any public funding. Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission (ZHRC) has recommended that the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare and Grain Marketing Board should have transparent systems for distribution of food aid and Presidential Farming Inputs that do not advance certain political agendas.  “Food distribution towards elections should be suspended to avoid political manipulation of the process, with the establishment of a mechanism which ensures that beneficiaries receive adequate allocations in advance of the election period,” said ZHRC. The Commonwealth Observer Group said to promote transparency and ensure greater accountability, consideration should be given to strengthening the Political Parties (Finance) Act through the inclusion of provisions regarding the declaration of assets by parties, candidates and Members of Parliament. CCJP has called the formulation of a policy or legislation with guidelines or framework for humanitarian distribution of aid. “Food is a fundamental right. Those who deny others their right to food on the basis of political affiliation-and therefore right to life-should be prosecuted.” The EU EOM said in order to promote accountability and transparency of campaign finance and expenditure there is need to introduce explicit regulations on campaign expenditure, including reporting requirements before the nomination process and shortly after the declaration of results. “In order for this to be effective there also needs to be a clear mandate for an independent institution – possibly ZEC - to oversee respect for such regulations and to undertake campaign finance audits.” EU EOM added that legislative measures, including effective and dissuasive sanctions, should be introduced to mitigate abuse of state resources and misuse of the advantage of incumbency, such as use of government vehicles, property and funds and the involvement of public officials in political activities, in order to guarantee the free expression of the will of electors and help create a more level playing field Other organisations like IRI/NDI EOM urged enforcement mechanisms for ensuring government resources do not serve partisan interests. “The ZEC, in accordance with international covenants and principles of equality, should ensure clear distinction between activities of the party in power and activities of the government to avoid abuse of state resources. The ZEC should be legally empowered to enforce provisions within the Electoral Act that strictly prohibit the politicization of food aid, agricultural inputs, and other social welfare benefits including penalties for misuse of state resources and the involvement of public officials in political activity. The ZEC and relevant bodies should also reinforce that the distribution of land titles, food aid, and farm implements by traditional leaders must be done through bureaucratic means and away from any campaign-related activity through intensive and continuous educational outreach about the limits of traditional leadership in the political environment.” [Adz